Decentralization only matters in so far
as it promotes permissionlessness and
self-custody. So it's a tool is not the
end in itself. The end is
permissionlessness.
[Music]
Hey everyone, welcome to the Smart
Economy podcast where we ask your
favorite builders the questions you wish
you could ask them yourself. This is a
production of neonnewstoay.com and I'm
your host Dylan Gowski. In this episode,
we're joined by Alux Smith, the
co-founder of Maya Protocol, a
decentralized liquidity provider for L1
to L1 swapping, and he's the author of
Prop 6, which helped resolve the issues
associated with the meltdown of Thorfi
that happened earlier this year. In this
conversation, we discussed building as a
pseudonmous founder, how permissionless
systems are used as a tool, the role of
the Cacao token in the Maya ecosystem,
how Cacao's token model served as a
solution for the TCY token that was
distributed following the collapse of
Thori, lessons learned from the launch
of TCY, and so much more. Just a
reminder, nothing said in this podcast
is a solicitation to buy or sell any
tokens and that the guest or host might
hold tokens discussed in any given
episode. You can see a disclaimer at
www.newstoday.com.
Also, if you enjoyed this episode,
please consider rating and reviewing it
on your favorite podcasting platform and
sharing with your friends and family.
Every rating, review, like, and comment
helps us reach more people to bring you
more of your favorite guests. With all
that said, I really enjoyed speaking
with Alux, and I hope you enjoy the
conversation, too. Hey everyone, welcome
to the Smart Economy podcast. Today,
we're joined by Alux Smith, the
co-founder of Maya Protocol, a
decentralized liquidity solution that
enables native L1 to L1 swapping. and
he's also the author of Prop 6, which
led to the creation of the TCY token
that was part of a whole Thorfi debacle.
Um, which I can't wait to to delve into
both of those things. But, uh, first of
all, how's it going today, Alux? Well,
good. I'm speaking from Bitcoin Vegas,
so excuse the boring, uh, generic
background. Uh, but doing pretty well.
Thank you for having me. Yeah, we were
kind of shooting it back and forth
before we hit record and um I actually
got to meet you and your team at Rare
Evo last August in Vegas. So, it's it's
cool to see you back in Vegas, back in
the States at a conference. You you
haven't necessarily gotten to spend a
ton of time at the Bitcoin conference,
but what's like the general vibe of of
the event right now? It's good vibes. I
think people have said it's it's
huge. Uh I I'll be I'll be heading there
today that you know the speaker roster
yesterday was great for the industry
pass and yeah I've heard good things odd
about Sailor with his uh reserves but I
I have my theory of why he doesn't post
them. It's going to be a fun week. I'm
more in the like you said the bisde dev
you know meeting people working some
stuff out with specific guys like I it's
just like as good a place as any to meet
when you're running like a
a big network of pseudonymous people
that are all over the place. So it's
just like a conference are just as good
a place as any. Do you find that you're
trying to attend more Bitcoin oriented
events or like crypto in general?
Because we met at Rare Evo, which is
kind of like a Cardano ecosystem event
and and now you're at a Bitcoin
conference. Maya Protocol is
multi-chain. Um, so do you find like
value in in going to more general crypto
events or Bitcoin specific events or do
you kind of have to touch them all and
go to all of them? Uh I I kind of look
where the DeFi scene is going because
like rare elbow started being Cardano
oriented but ended up being very uh bit
more DeFi and crosschain. So we tended
that. Uh here in Bitcoin Vegas uh I
always wanted to come to a Bitcoin one
is the first time. So it's fun. But I
I'm coming specifically to meet very
specific people. But uh probably going
to permissionless token 49 in Singapore.
Those are more general. But it's they're
they're still kind of like intense or
like uh more decision oriented cuz I was
to I was there to in Austin for uh what
was it? Coindesk consensus. Consensus.
Yeah. That's too corporate for my taste.
Uh so like there's not much I we can do
there. Like they're like, "Oh yeah,
where's your company based at?" I'm
like, "Are you guys why are you guys
stopping companies in a crypto event?"
So, uh yeah, I think consensus and and
those more like uh corporate ones are
not for us. Uh although maybe, you know,
there's something someone specific to
see. Yeah. And it's a shame that you
haven't had a chance to go to the
Bitcoin conference yet because yesterday
I saw a question being asked on stage
and the question asker was basically
saying like we've evolved past um owning
your own keys like it doesn't really
matter, not your keys, not your coins
anymore. And for like a black rockck or
an institution, they're starting to
provide uh services that custody keys on
behalf of users. So we're starting to
get into this realm of
institutionalization of people that are
buying and holding crypto on behalf of
like mainstream users. And so um you
mentioned that consensus kind of has
these sort of people there. And I was
wondering if like you're seeing the same
thing at the Bitcoin conference, but you
were doing BD all yesterday. Didn't
really have a chance to go see all of
that. Yeah. So maybe before we jump into
kind of like uh what you're working on,
you are pseudonmous. You you go by Alux
Smith, so I didn't really have a chance
to kind of like stumble on your LinkedIn
or anything like that. So what were you
doing kind of before you you and your
team founded Maya Protocol? Were you
working in in blockchain and web 3 or
were you a developer in another
industry? What was kind of like your
path before you got into blockchain and
crypto? We have been in startups. We're
still in startups. Uh, one of the three
co-founders manages that side of the
business. We have a software agency
count every engineer and designer we
have. We're like upwards of 70 people
out of which around six to seven are in
Maya. Uh, so the the team is the team in
reality is a bit bigger. But that's kind
of where we came from. We always wanted
to get into crypto. I just don't like
smart contracts. uh solidity uh actually
solidity on EVM that's kind of like I
don't like it uh up on reading about it
it's a very adversarial environment you
know you have worry about many things in
a in a design so uh saw to chain fell in
love with it and it was her first dip
into into uh building in in blockchain
just for poking through building Maya
yeah it was her first time so it took a
it took a a while to get the ropes, but
it's been four years since and uh quite
a fun ride. Yeah. Are you still is so is
your development company um working on
non web 3 non-crypto stuff as well?
Yeah. Interesting. Um so what was your
kind of genesis then into into Bitcoin
and Ethereum? Maybe you don't like smart
contracts, so it wasn't Ethereum that
was kind of like yahha moment. Do you
remember the first time you came across
crypto and like what what it took for
you to get to the point where you're
like, I understand this. Let's build
here. Yeah, I was I was offered crypto
by a friend like let's let's buy one
Bitcoin. I think I don't remember what
price it was. It was pretty low pretty
low. These I wasn't I was actually in
high school. We saw the price and we
didn't know it was divisible. So, it was
like, "Oh, we can't afford one. Okay,
let's let's forget about it. We should
have bought like 10%." Yeah, cuz that
that we could have afford it. But yeah,
we were we were darks. But much later I
did start to get into it kind of like
read a little bit. Uh uh you know I like
research so I I would go to the white
papers but I hadn't dipped anything yet.
Then bought a little bit then helped
someone with their cold storage
solution. So got a little bit more
interested and then had to buy back uh
some ETH and force hold it for like four
years. So that was it's an interesting
story. I can I can uh tell it some other
time because it it's funny but it will
take us a while. But uh we ended up
pretty much holding E from 80 to like
1,600. So uh force follows are great. Uh
set and forget. I think if you're trying
to beat the market, it's very difficult.
But uh we did pretty well on that run.
And uh so that of course got me more
interested and you know uh I started
doing even more research reading more
white papers and stumbled onto thought
chain. I was an LP there in Ether Run
and this is when you know I was
listening to a webinar and actually JP
is speaking in the webinar and the guy
says you know eventually there might be
three or four of these things because
you know the market's huge there's a lot
of chains there's a lot of demand and
you know we can't take them all. I was
like, "Oh, I want to be second." I think
this is too important. Well, I I come
from a developing country, Mexico. Uh,
everybody loves Mexico, but we all know
it's in not fully developed. But, uh,
here, you know, in Latin America, you
can have a dictator up in a, you know,
in a niffy and you can have the systems
choke you in the niffy and everybody
knows the government's out to get you.
So here we don't have the luxury of
using crypto for you know let's fake
money. We are here to actually kind of
free ourselves from that because it's
what we've lived for for the past
century. So you see Venezuela, you see
where Argentina was, you see uh where
Nicaragua is and you're like how do we
make Mexico avoid this? And the only the
only solution is you cannot have the
government control the monetary system.
uh because actually Mexico has been
relatively responsible with it. We have
a very good central bankers
interestingly and they end up making it
in the world economic forum which is
funny to me but uh yeah we Mexicans are
everywhere but that's between that and
you know getting interested and reading
the white papers and stuff I just think
torch's too important. Uh so we we
thought to build uh redundancy for Thor
chain and that's that's what we've been
do doing ever since. Cool. Yeah. I've
had Chad on the podcast as well as JP.
So, it's nice to have kind of like a
third head of the Thor Chain ecosystem
kind of join the pod. And I remember uh
I was using like Asgard decks way back
in the day and and when Thor Chain was
still I think it was on B&B chain back
in the day. That's when what what when
Rune was. So before even like the L1 to
L1 swapping went live like I've I I
bought into the mission into the vision
and the scope of Thor Chain was just so
large. It was a really hard problem to
solve and it took years and years and
years. And so it's really cool to
finally see like now we have Maya
protocol. there's like swapkit that's
enabling other teams to start building
on top of the ThorChain solutions. So,
um yeah, like it's it's really
interesting to hear that you heard that
Thor Chain can't handle all of the
traffic. It can't handle all of the
tokens and you decided like, okay, let's
like step up and and be the team that
does this. So before we kind of like
delve further into Maya, um you you hit
on a really interesting point and and
that's mostly that like you think of
like countries in Latin America, you
think of countries in like Eastern
Europe, in the Mediterranean who have
just like terrible fiat monetary
policies, rampant inflation. I mean, you
even said like Argentina is good. Like
it still has 46% inflation. It's not
200% inflation year-over-year. So like
the fact that this is good for an
emerging economy in in Latin America, it
still kind of like showcases the
difference between what an American or a
European holding crypto is, which is a
speculative hope that number goes up
versus like somebody living in Latam or
in Southeast Asia or even in like the
Gulf States or wherever where blockchain
is used as a tool because a lot of
people can't gain access to a bank
account or the central banker are
devaluing the currency at a rapid rate.
So beyond just like and and you also
mentioned that like Mexico is not in
necessarily an issue right now with with
the currency. You have decent central
bankers. So it's not like DeFi and
crypto is a lifeline
like as it is for somebody in Nicaragua
or Argentina. But there's still a
different relationship that like the
region has with this technology because
it enables people to participate in like
an international economic manner that
they might not have necessarily been
able to. So what's like on the ground
when when you're meeting with like your
your fellow citizens in Mexico and
you're talking with people who are
crypto natives and maybe people who
aren't crypto natives, what's just like
the vibe like? Is there uh receptiveness
to this technology? Are like our parents
are our grandparents seeing the value of
Bitcoin and blockchain networks and are
they onboarding? Do they understand like
the value prop of DeFi? And is what DeFi
offers is that more than the hurdles it
takes to kind of like start
understanding crypto? Like what's just
the general vibe like in the region? Are
are people buying into it? Are they
adopting it? Are they using it? Yeah.
So, we do have decent central bankers
like you said, but we do have a pending
doom of of having like uh uh
expropriation and stuff like that
happen. Uh so, it's a it's a fear that
people have because it's happened before
in Mexico many many years ago. I think
already over a century, but still it can
happen. So, um people will will see also
crypto as an exit plan. So, it's not
only a hedge against inflation, which
you know in Argentina you definitely had
to though. We we had so few we have a
few employees in Argentina. We pay them
with crypto and they were the the rich
kids in the block because their currency
was worth the same next week. But in in
uh uh in Mexico is definitely also an
exit plan. If you need to move uh your
ship and go live in Spain or whatever or
in Salvador or Singapore or Switzerland,
those are usually the suspects. You're
very light on your feet with crypto. Uh
it's very, you know, people have real
estate, but we know everybody knows that
will take a while to offload if things
go to the downturn. Gold is heavy. So,
it's just that yeah, if you need to to
go, you you can take that with you. I
know at least for like my family that
gives them peace. Uh so, that's
definitely something even adults can
understand like grown 60 year old
people. I wouldn't say grandparents
if because people will think of 70s 80s
those are coasting they're no longer
really strategizing but if you talk with
someone in their 50s or 60s they will
understand immediately about the being
you know having a reserve that you can
have a peer anywhere else in the world
next week if you need to if you need to
move so that's one of the key selling
points in Mexico uh there is a crypto
market It's growing. There is a builder
market. It's growing. You have Bitso,
which is a unicorn that was uh born in
raised in Mexico uh and doing pretty
well. It's decently managed for a
central exchange. People are still in
the road to adoption, but it's still too
difficult and and that's another key
problem I'm trying to solve elsewhere,
not not with my uh but how do we make it
very stupidly simple so that my mom can
use it without my help? That's kind of
like my goal. So you know uh looking at
some solutions for that also for
e-commerce payment gateways
and uh uh points of sale. So in the same
solution needs to cover all of it. How
do we make it very easy for the user and
how do we make it easy to spend? So
that's that's something that requires
more work. But yeah, another key future
is that you are you in the US are
spoiled because you have access to
financial instruments. Everybody's
banked, rates are low, can go you can
IPO in New York very easily. Uh you have
access to a lot of things. The only
thing that sucks is your legal system.
It's too expensive. But beyond that, uh
uh everything is great. And that's
something you don't have in Mexico. in
Mexico, you know, banks won't lend you.
Uh it's difficult to get an account uh
once you get it. You don't have access
to a lot of things. Honestly, you don't
have like you cannot uh easily refinance
property. There's no there's no loans
today by a Mexican bank for uh
industrial warehousing. I know cuz I
developed them. So, I cannot even, you
know, get leverage for that at all. And
or stock market sucks. and Mexico is the
best off in Latin America.
So the fact that a team can build and go
to market and access the worldwide
markets in crypto with no permission,
that's also very powerful for Latin
Americans because now it enables like
Latin America has always had talented
people, but they end up going to work
for someone in California, for someone
in New York, for someone in Berlin, uh
for someone in Switzerland. But it's
very difficult to make it on your own.
Uh and it's mainly because the talent is
there. You just don't have access to the
market. You need you need to go through
someone that will give you permission.
Uh because they're they're very highly
capital is very highly protected by
social structures. Uh so the fact that
in crypto you can go direct that's also
super powerful in Latin America and it's
something people are aware like that.
That's another thing uh uh people in
their 50s and 60s will understand. Oh,
you can kind of like IPO of sorts and
like go to market and have somebody in
South Africa buy your coin. Yeah. Oh,
that's awesome. Oh, that I love that.
And and then they start asking me, oh,
can I do that for my shoe company? I'm
like, no, no, no.
That you cannot tokenize your shoe
company yet. But, uh it's something that
does does ring well there. Are you
starting to see cases where like if
somebody wants to purchase an industrial
warehouse or a per a commercial property
where they're able to leverage like
Bitcoin or Ethereum to take out loans in
USDT or USDC in order to like purchase
realworld commercial warehouses or are
we still a little too far away from
that? Uh not the taking out loans. I
I've heard that I want to purchase with
Bitcoin or ES but it's rare. It's very
rare, but uh it does start to make more
noise every time Bitcoin is at an
all-time high. You know, my my wife's
uncle calls again say, "Oh, how is it
doing? I heard something good about it."
You know, also when it crashes, you
know, "Oh, I I I heard it's done." I'm
like, "Yeah, no, it's not done. It's a
part of it's normal. It's a market."
That transcends borders. That happens up
here, too, with my my aunts and uncles.
Okay, cool. So, one last question uh
before we dig into Maya and Thorfi. Um,
why why be pseudonmous? What are what
are the benefits and the reasons for
being a pseudonmous founder? I guess
maybe if I were to take a guess, uh, you
mentioned how like we're spoiled here in
the States. So, for me, it pays to be
doxed. It pays to have my name out there
because if I want to go get a bank loan
for starting a web 3 business, like it's
okay. I I can just have my name out
there. But, but maybe that benefit, that
value isn't there in Latin America. So
also like we see a lot of uh the crime
that's related to people being
kidnapped. So it's very easily
understandable why someone would want to
be anonymous but you walk the line of of
both being anonymous but also kind of
like being out there and being a face
that people can talk with. So so why be
pseudonymous? What what are the
benefits? What are the reasons? Why did
you choose to do this? So personal
security is the main one. I'm not
worrying about the crypto guy
uh that you know knows my orchain to see
my face and come find me. Good luck to
them uh to find me and and and chase me
in Mexico. That's it's by turf. But
there's bigger fish in my turf. You do
have organized crime in Mexico. It's
relatively safe in Guadalajara or like
almost completely safe in Guadalajara
specifically, but you don't want to have
a high profile. Anyway, I I refrain to
my home and work from there and I don't
wear or do flashy things and that's
enough. I'm building for a purpose and
for my family's future. So, I I don't
need to be I don't need to flash and
that's that's a an important one. Second
is what we're building is uh
permissionless systems.
uh and I'm I don't this administration
is friendly but I don't necessarily give
have that as a given for us or overall
world it can change very quickly as it
changed back from being terrible with
Biden to now okay with Trump so some of
us have been chased
and and having just an extra step look
if somebody wants to find me they can
but having an extra step and keeping a
low profile I think is healthy
And uh it gave it set the tone for my
team as well so that they're saying
their their faces aren't out there. Uh
so I'm a bit more responsible. I I
started the the this thing off. I'm uh
and I'm fine with the risk I'm taking,
but I don't think it's fair for them.
But if you if you don't start off like
if the leader is ducks, then like
everybody will will wouldn't take it
seriously. So I do want them also taking
it seriously for their safety. Finally,
it's also just a challenge because why
should it matter what what my name is?
Uh if the code is there, the system is
decentralized,
the uh you know everything's transparent
and onchain, why does my name matter?
And if it does, then you're we're doing
something wrong or the market is uh
doing something wrong. So it's just like
also out of principle a little bit. So,
one of the things that I care about here
obviously is like stable coin
legislation, market structure bill, so
that we as an industry can be able to
survive a Biden or a Trump and it
doesn't matter who's in office. Um,
because there's law that says whether
this can be here or can't be here. There
were multiple times over the past couple
years where we almost moved our business
offshore because of the Biden
administration. How did that have an
impact in your neck of the woods? Um,
you mentioned your administration's
relatively friendly to the space. Does
does having like your neighbor to the
north with the biggest military that's
not afraid to go give freedom to someone
who has oil under their country, does
that like impact you guys in in a
negative way or is it really just kind
of more noise for what you guys are
doing and what you're building? It was
unnerving under Biden seeing some people
uh you know be served wells notices,
some people getting charged and arrested
and put in jail. So it I was very far
removed and we we definitely are doing
things either better or quieter. So like
and I knew we're not doing anything
wrong. It's if you if you see law what
we're doing is actually right. We're
we're keeping to constitutions, we're
keeping to uh law and order uh is just
governed by code. So u in that sense I I
felt some internal peace but it was on
Arabic. Um now now with Trump it does
seem like okay we can breathe and at
least these four probably eight years we
can build and let build you know live
and let live. So uh uh that that does
feel a little bit better. I can tell you
know my wife that it's okay uh and that
there's not going to be any any problems
anytime soon. And that's of course also
nice for her. Uh so in Mexico
specifically there's just no regulation
on crypto. It's just like, oh, if you
made the money, you should report it and
pay taxes on it if you want to kind of
bankerize it, but uh they don't
recognize it as a currency, as a as a
asset, as a anything. It's just magic
internet money that they don't
understand. So, I'm perfectly fine.
That's in that way to be honest. So, uh
in Mexico, I don't really see an issue.
And I think it's important an important
battle to to to
fight. I a lot of respect to Zcash for
instance that they're doing a privacy
oriented coin based in the US and
they're lobbying every week in
Washington. Uh they have a guy specially
for that. Uh that fight is a is a tough
one, but it's it's it's one that sets a
precedence for the future. uh and that
makes you know armors it against future
you know administrations. So I find that
pretty good. We saw in January when JP
kind of froze Thorfy a instance where
maybe Thor chain wasn't as decentralized
as we thought it was. Um there have been
changes since that's been made to the
the node architecture and and and ways
in which things can be frozen and there
needs to be some governance put into
place. But it brought into the question
like this this this grander kind of
philosophical you know what's the level
of centralization versus
decentralization.
And I've been saying for years that
decentralization is a spectrum. You can
have token decentralization
uh client decentralization programming
language decentralization geographic
developer all these different things
that kind of like build into the levels
of decentralization. So where would you
kind of like rank Maya protocol right
now? Like if you and your team walked
away from the project, is the code is
the protocol at a place in its maturity
where it can continue to persist even
without a dedicated team working on it?
So there's already two teams building on
Maya, not only Maya. So much like Thor
Chain and Nine Realms. So uh on that
regard, that's that's actually pretty
good. We don't have any validators
at all. We don't control the network
whatsoever. I think uh and we have
excellent node operators. So I think it
can it could live on. It would be a
blow. It would slow things down. They
would have to agree which new GitLab
account to have cuz the GLAB we we
administer it. So they called repo but
they can you know fork it and continue
elsewhere. It would just take some time
to coordinate and kind of make sense of
you know where the hell are these guys
we need to update this or that. So, I
think on that it'll be fine. So, the
network is
decentralized. It's not decentralized
enough yet. Uh, but we're young. I I
don't beat myself up for that. It's it's
going to happen as we keep growing.
We're still small. For a $25 million
market cap, we're incredibly
decentralized. So, you know, the code is
open source. We build in the open.
Everything's public and transparent. We
had a fair launch. The token is well
distributed. uh you don't need the you
need liquidity, you need to bond. So uh
since it's not the token itself, the
current node set cannot kind of like
protect the token and and uh make sure
they're the only ones that can own it.
So people can buy up liquidity units and
bond those. Um so there's there's
several things uh promoting
decentralization. It's just that we're
young and small, so it there's a there's
a natural limit, but it's definitely
better than our multisync. I mean, I
think we could even argue that really
even what it's 13 years since Bitcoin
first mined its first token that there's
really truly only two decentralized
networks and that's Bitcoin and
Ethereum. And you can even argue the
levels of decentralization for both of
those. So again, that's why it's so
important to think of decentralization
as a spectrum that it's not uh it's not
binary. It's not black or white.
Exactly. Yeah. And and like for me
decentralization only matters in so far
as it promotes
permissionlessness and self-custody.
Uh so it's a tool. It's not the end in
itself. The end is permissionlessness.
That's what we built Bitcoin for. That
that is a key word. As Eric Forhees very
eloquently said last year in
permissionless the centralization
uh if it's it can be 100 people that are
this aligned with the permissionless
value and then the centralization is not
good. So uh something that we've
demonstrated in my eyes that we care
about permissionlessness first uh with
you know a few crisis that have happened
over the last year that is the true
north that is a star that we should
follow. The reason we're building here
is to have people be free and not
require permission to access their
money. That's why self-cost is important
and the markets. That's why DeFi is
important. Uh um decentralization in
itself is just some a very a very
elegant way to get there. Another
elegant way get way way to get there is
privacy and the best you can have is
privacy and decentralized because then
it's truly equipped to to protect the
freedoms of the small ones and the big
ones who matter who matter also to
create the market and to provide
prosperity. So uh the problem is there's
a huge middle there that if they if they
without privacy or without the
centralizations or both they start
giving up freedom for security and they
start doing the ruling of the majority
the tyranny of the majority as well. So
those are two things you want to avoid.
Decentralization and and privacy achieve
that but the end goal is
permissionlessness and self-esteeing.
Mhm. You mentioned that the project is a
$25 million market cap. So, are you
viewing just that through the eyes of
the CowCow token and maybe like let's
just take a moment uh I I always like to
assume that our guests are a combination
of crypton natives and and my mom. So,
when we're describing things sometimes I
ask us to Eli 5 some principles that are
very native to you and me. We understand
these inherently. Um, but then also we
try to keep into perspective somebody
who's never heard of Maya protocol
before or is just grasping with what
cryptocurrencies are. So with all that
said, can you just like kind of give a
brief Eli 5 of what the KCA token is and
the role that it that it has within the
Maya ecosystem? So Kaka is the native
token of Maya protocol. Maya is a chain,
a sovereign chain that runs a code
similar to Cosmos. Um but what it
actually does is connect to several
other chains say Bitcoin and ETH to
facilitate crosschain swaps. So in order
to facilitate this swap what Maya does
is run vaults in Bitcoin and vaults on
ETH that people can have funds in when
they LP and that these vaults you can
send to them with some instructions in
the memo that tells Maya, okay, I want
this bitcoin converted into ETH to this
address. So that's what bio does. But in
the middle for all of that to work, we
have cacao which is an economic u token
which is used for people to pair their
liquidity with. So they added bitcoin
and cacao. Somebody else added e and
cacao. Somebody else adds ze and cacao.
And what happens is in the swap you just
said here's the bitcoin at what is and
maya will do that for you. You don't
even need to know cacao exists. But in
the background it actually two swaps are
happening. Bitcoin to cacao, cacao to
ETH. So that's pretty much the gist of
it. Why we choose to do that is because
if you don't if you don't have an
intermediary token, um what the problem
you start to run into is liquidity
fragmentation because now you need uh n
factorial pools for uh n assets
supported whereas
with Orway you just need n pools. So the
liquid is much more concentrated. Now
you could use a different intermediary
token. That's the chain what chain flip
chose to do. They're using USDC. But now
you're introducing third party risk. So
now uh USDC is a it's a problem. And
yes, they could change it, but it's a
problem.
Whereas on in my own for onchain we have
an internal token that's kind of like a
unit of account and it's what also
powers the incentives around the
everything else because now you can uh
charge fees keep them in cacao and
provide them to the players as
incentives that are doing good not
needing any inflation by the way. Maya
has had no inflation since it launched
so uh it's all coming from swap piece
and we're fine being small and growing
where we deserve to be. it I I I much
rather the continuous
progressive building than you know the
massive booms and busts. So that's kind
of the my way stability I I think is uh
preferred and it's paid off because
integration partners also are looking
for stability. If you have you know uh
trustw integrate you they're looking for
stability in their in their swap
provider. They don't care if it's small
they just care if it's stable. I think
you just hit on a key differentiator
between Maya and Thor Chain and that's
like the zero inflation basically. So am
I correct in assuming that whenever
there's a swap um not only do fees go to
cacao token holders but that also kind
of triggers the the the creation of new
cowcow tokens or or how am I how am I
getting this wrong? No, we have 100
million cow tokens period. When somebody
paid Bitcoin to ETH, swap Bitcoin to
ETH, they got a little bit ETH, less ETH
than they should, the difference are
fees. And you can extract those fees
from the pools in Cacao terms and put
them somewhere to be paid out. And we
pay it not to cacao holders, but to
active users. So liquidity providers and
nodes. Um, but you don't need to inflate
like the same 100 million cacaos are
still there. They just changed hands
from the user who's willingly paying
fees in they don't know it was in caca
in cacao the system managed it for them
and those doing something that you want
more often happening who get that cacao
for their work or risk by the way and
and since prop six tot has also become
non-inflationary
so uh we got them into the into the club
well we're going to delve into prop six
here in a minute because I think just
providing the context text in the
background for Maya protocol really
showcased how you were the right team at
the right time to provide the solution
to the Thorfi issues. Um but I'm just
curious also other than uh well now Rune
is not an inflationary asset but
beforehand it might have been. So what
were some of the other differences then
between Cacao and Rune? Because the the
way in which cacao operates is very much
in the same way Rune operates in
ThorChain where you have a Bitcoin to
Rune pool, a Rune to Ethereum pool and
if you want to natively swap Bitcoin to
Ethereum, you trade your Bitcoin for
Rune and then Rune for Ethereum. It's
very it's very similar with with Maya
protocol. So what were the other kind of
like key nuances or the key differences
between Maya and between Thor Chain the
way it was? So we on forchain you also
bond ruin for validators on Maya you run
you bond liquidity. So you have Bitcoin
cacao and you bond that not the pure
cacao. So uh that's a that's a key
difference. We don't have we didn't have
lending or savers.
We um that saved you probably. Yeah. We
didn't have we don't have inflation. We
never had it. Uh emissions of course are
always you know beating prices down. We
were fairly launched early on. So the
the token was well distributed and in no
central exchange. Room has a big amount
of its float in central exchanges which
you know brings some other sort of
problems at times. I think those are the
main bits. Uh we we always cared a lot
about reflexivity and avoiding it on
Maya because again I believe we should
we we're in the game of creating swap
volume and swap volume requires pool
depth but it also requires partners that
integrate us. They care a lot about
stability. So you should be your design
shouldn't be made to leverage and go up
and go back down and go back up and go
back down. It should be as stable as you
can design it. Yeah. There was a a
calculator that I would play around with
in 2022 where if you looked at all of
the assets that were part of the Thor
chain ecosystem, then you could like
play with the price and you would seen
the price of Rune go up and that would
kind of like drive like a a hyper
speculative kind of like hope and
assumption for the underlying Rune asset
which it sounds really interesting that
that wasn't necessarily like baked into
the cacao model. So you mentioned or or
am I incorrect? Well, it it is meant to
grow and it will uh it just has to make
sense with the swap volume. Uh it should
follow a swap volume in an a regular
swap volume increase not a spike. A
spike is doesn't matter but it's just
rewards for the current guys. But if
it's regularly a higher volume, the
price should follow. It shouldn't be
that the price happens and then
hopefully we can sustain the valuation
because then it's when you get those
things. So Maya's still young. Are you
able to kind of like objectively see
this thesis playing out now as you kind
of add more integrators, add more
partners, and you start to see volume
over time kind of like increase
natively? Are you starting to see the
thesis that the price or the value of
the cacao token matches the volume that
rises? Is that playing out now? Yeah.
So, we started having volumes of $40,000
a day, been 400. Now, 4 million. We had
40 million one day. That's our spike.
When was that? When there was a massive
market dump. No, it's just market
movement. So, there's a lot of liquidity
moving and uh chain cannot have it all.
So there's there end up being some uh
pools in in fortune get get priced
differently because of moving so much
that all of a sudden Maya becomes very
competitive even for very large swaps.
So some will end up on on court as we
see that there is definitely an effect
in in the token. So yeah definitely
we've seen it. The cow is very
interesting because there's two things
that I like it that I like which is uh
the speculators start to leave and the
token goes a little gets a little bit
compressed and now we we get close to
the very fair valuation
uh and you know the the APYs are pretty
good actually for people in the system
everything's fine the cacao market cap
is low but everything's fine and then
all of a sudden people fomo and it's
scarce so all the speculators come in
and they're like beating each other. So
we we went from like 13 cents to $130
because of that and not because of any
tokconomic design promoting that. It's
just that people got excited. Then we we
what the second interesting thing is we
wrote it back down to 25, you know, 20
25 cents and everything's fine. The
system's okay. You know, whoever wanted
to leave left. But the system has kept
servicing swaps and increasing its
volumes and who held held. Who profited
profited and who lost lost? But nobody
is coming here to Bang the door of why
is cacao 20 25 cents. Everybody
understands you know some people bought
the top. It's their problem. Uh and and
I I I am feeling this compression now
like the the pump being primed again. So
uh we'll see. We'll see. It's it's
definitely fun, but I I much rather that
we grow, you know, 10 20% month over
month, uh, year over year, not these
kind of spikes. Those, uh, I don't know,
they're they just create sometimes fast
expectations and they, uh, put kind of
unnecessary pressure in the in the team
sometimes to get back there, which is
unreasonable. So, uh, yeah, I I I like
more the the steady approach, but the
market is the market is a market. You
cannot It's permissionless, so I cannot
stop anybody from doing anything. Yeah,
I've been working. So, the the podcast
is protocol agnostic, but I I spend most
of my day in the Neo ecosystem, which is
an OG L1 from 2016.
And you just get a lot of people who are
mad about token price and they come in
and they're very salty and they put a
lot of expectations on teams and
builders. And there's a difference
between a cacao token that has a native
inherent utility that's very clearly
defined. It is used as a second half of
liquidity pools so that you can do L1 to
L1 swaps versus an L1 token that's
native to a blockchain that's a little
bit more speculative. Like I would still
argue that we don't have a value
proposition for Ethereum right now. we
can't point as to why the the price of
Ethereum is the price that it is. So
with that, you get a lot of people who
might get upset at you at the price of
the of the token. So it's nice to to
hear that you're not necessarily dealing
with I call them salty people. You're
not necessarily dealing with like salty
bag holders. There's a few there's a
few, but uh very very few very few. And
you know, we we launch a token fairly.
We gave all of the supply away for free.
We got zero. Uh we earn a a percentage
of swap fees tokenized in the Maya
token. Which you will find it starts to
sound very similar to TCY. But that's
the way we launched. So like it's also
not that they can point and say, "Oh,
you guys probably sold the top." Like we
don't have any cacao. Any cacao we have,
we earned through through making you for
every $9 you guys earned. We earned one.
So like if anything use all the talk.
So uh it's a refreshing setup where I'm
not kind of constantly anxious or
worried. Uh and that that helps Maya be
able to focus on how does the next five
years look. Not like how do we get next
month to have cacao higher. I don't I
don't care about cacao price. I care
about swap fees. And that's kind of what
what would power the system. So, which
let's let's transition into TCY because
we only have a quarter of our time left
and I'll just do my best to describe
what the situation was and you let me
know from a very high level where I got
it wrong. In January of this year, um it
was noticed that uh Thorfi, which is
Thor Chain's DeFi ecosystem, uh there
was an issue with the borrow and lend
program. And there's probably a lot more
nuance to this, but long story short,
uh, people were able to lend their
tokens and borrow tokens, which somehow
got co-mingled with the liquidity pools
that were involved in Thor Chain. And so
we lost the ability for people to
identify the claims they had on tokens
that belong to LPs and belong to
borrowers and savers. JP, one of the
founders of Thor Chain, essentially uh
froze Thorfi using his admin keys.
Again, I'm sure there's better terms and
better ways to to outline this. And that
was kind of like the canary in the coal
mine. And that basically said, "Hey,
there's a problem here with Dorfy." And
JP froze it. But then he was eventually
removed from having that level of power.
And then a month later, the validators,
the node operators for Thor Chain
actually opted to freeze Thorfy because
there was indeed an issue with this
co-mingling of assets and borrow lend as
well as the LPS which if it would have
allowed a bank run. Basically, it would
have tanked the price of Rune, which
would have made the ability for Thor
Chain to operate with the liquidity
pools null and void. And there would
have been a bank run or a chain run I
guess we call it so strong that Thor
chain would have no longer been able to
operate. And I'm in the camp that Thor
Chain, Maya, Chain Flip, this is the
probably with the the addition of smart
contract development on a blockchain
network and just Bitcoin in general.
This is probably like the third most
important contribution to blockchain and
crypto in general. like we need to be
able to permissionlessly, trustlessly
trade between L1 to L1. So that's kind
of like the overview as I see it for
what the issue was with Doorchain and it
was up to the community to provide a
solution. And so Maya protocol with
basically with the the structure of
Cacao token, you guys were pretty much
like the perfect solution to create Prop
6 and which led to the launch of TCY
which launched earlier this month. So
where did I did I generally get it
right? Where am I getting things wrong?
And maybe you can kind of like use this
as a launching pad and to talk about how
you came up with Prop 6 and the solution
for TCY. So the chain run would have
happened without with or without a
pause. The writing was on the wall. The
system was moving quickly into
insolveny. So something needed to be
done. Now something that people
sometimes don't understand is that
because of how AMMs work and how
liquidity works, if run kept going to
zero, the amount of Bitcoin there to pay
back savers and lenders would also go to
zero. So they would say no let let it
happen and you know we get our bitcoin
back. No no no there's not going to be
any bitcoin for you. Now at the time of
the second pause people if if we had
killed chain let's say let's oh let's
kill those guys made a mistake and they
don't deserve to to be around anymore.
Uh which is I think it's ridiculous but
let's let's let's think about that for a
second. Well, there at that time there
were $60 million of assets in the pools
and there was a hund00 million dollars
of outstanding savers, $100 million of
outstanding lenders and $100 million of
uh DLP capital that got lost as well uh
in the in the in the meltdown. So there
were 20 cents on the dollar per person
and they would have gotten those 20
cents on the dollar while killing Rune
which would have destroyed $500 million
of equity. So you're you're paying 60
killing killing 500s and not even being
able to pay another 240 that you should.
So you're you're just it's a terrible
idea. So uh there was a a big torch and
hater camp promoting that it was and I
tried explaining and it was ridiculous.
They they just see everything as zero
sum. The thing is tortion is not zero
sum. It's providing a valuable service.
During all of this time swaps kept
working. By the way was paused but swaps
kept getting served hundred millions of
dollars in swaps hundreds of thousands
in a piece every every single day. So
the question was what do how do we take
this cash flow this amazing protocol and
this great community that cares about
the mission and do a solution. So prop 6
gets a little bit inspired in the Maya
token. It gets a little which is how we
get paid with swap piece. It gets a
little bit inspired with DCB and and
Pedro's proposal uh their different
proposal that that we read and they
build on it to generate to create kind
of a restructuring plan which is we
cannot pay you $200 million. What we can
is commit to pay you 10% in perpetuity
tokenized in this TCY token. We minted
206 million because that's the 206
million that were owed. uh we gave them
to the to the users affected and now
they can choose and we created a pool so
they can choose whether they stay on or
they sell it at any haircut that each
individual chooses. Now the pool will
allow people to buy it as well. And why
would they buy it? Because they expect
to volume to go up. uh the bottom of the
torch volume went down to 60 to 80
million is now again uh uh on top on top
of the 100 millions 150. So people
betting that it will get back to the 500
million it was it was doing before. So
there's people buying it uh and then
that pushes price up and at some point
the price is such that someone that was
owed $1 says you know I'm fine with 40
cents. So we had a very good launch. It
launched on 5th of May of 2025. It went
up to 54 cents the first day, then back
down to the 25 to 30 cents. Then, you
know, a little bit we, you know, the
recovery is still ongoing. We went, it
went up to 30 to 35 cents. Now, it's in
the 35 to 40 all of the time. So,
hopefully we get to, it's only been
three weeks, four weeks. Uh, so
hopefully uh we get to $1 soon enough.
uh which at that point it means that
every every affected user got made whole
uh according to the reference price of
uh 23rd of January. I think uh it's a
fair system and the way we build the
tokconomics is also such that the
protocol is constantly also buying TCY.
It's not only paying 10% to holders,
it's it's also there's a few mechanisms
to buy back TCY as well. So the protocol
is also bidding it up and uh kind of p
purchasing back it swap fees which is
interesting. And yeah we wrote the
proposal on the 2nd of February 10 days
after the second pause. I was actually I
had just met JP. I was driving back to
Mexico City 5 hours drive. My sister was
giving birth. Uh but I had I had it I
had the idea. I wrote it down in the
hospital published it. started rallying
the troops uh telling people you know uh
they should go for it. Uh there was a
proposal by JP himself with like 11
votes, a proposal by Night Realms with
like seven votes and mine got to 12
in like an hour all of a sudden. So it
was people were hungry for for something
uh along these lines. So uh basically
that night I was you know hopping onto
spaces then being with my family then
another space then uh you know some
tacos with my dad another uh spaces you
know hold the kid for the first time and
then uh you know I I went and you know
had met with nodes met with different
people around the world and finally at 4
in the morning so 10 10 hours after I
wrote it uh the the proposal passed with
67% consensus It was an interesting
time. But then I woke up next day to the
cold reality that now I had to get it
done. It's not only about proposing it.
So uh the next three months were about
uh three months and three days were
about uh ironing out details
uh simplifying where it could be
simplified improve where it could be
improved coded. it was like 90 $100,000
sorry 90,000 to 100,000 lines of code
testing it and you know doing things
around it so like was the token logo how
you know all of these questions of you
know how will the claiming procedure
work uh how will the UI with the
claiming procedure happen where will
this be hosted create the documentation
for other interfaces to host it as well
uh so all of these things and we really
wanted to do it as fast as possible
uh because we had a lot of people
counting on us. So uh yeah, it took us
three months but it it went off to a
great start and uh happy with the
results so far. It's been quite the ride
and it was not only us like me and the
Maya team. Uh there was also nights.
Shout out to Orion. I'm actually here to
meet him in Vegas after after all of
this. We practically talked daily and
met three four times a week. uh during
all of this uh he he was great and kind
of uh uh you know we were pingponging
the proposal you know oh we should do
this no because of that okay then we
should do this okay let's do that uh so
that that was essentially our our job
for three months but it's a it's a very
interesting token from a very
interesting protocol we removed
inflation as well from chain that was
causing sell pressure and now rune was
very leveraged so that's one of the ways
we've been shedding its leverage So now
fortune is I would say as healthy as it
can be and healthier than it's been the
last four years. So uh very excited of
where it's at and uh getting it ready
for its next stage of growth. Yeah. And
full disclosure, I'm a TCY holder. I got
caught up in the uh the fiasco. I was a
lender for for many years basically
since since earn was launched on on
Thorfi. So, it's kind of an honor to
have you join the pod because I remember
when your proposal came through, it was
the first kind of like light of hope
that I felt as a disgruntled token
holder and an ecosystem participant. And
I remember just kind of thinking like,
I'll take my my 20% and walk away now
when they were talking about just
shutting down Thor Chain and
distributing the funds. So, um I think
you and your team and and the folks at
Nine Realm and shout out Orion. I met
him at uh token last year and maybe it
was Binance Blockchain Week in Dubai. Uh
but really nice fellow. So, shout out to
the work that you guys did. Um fantastic
work. You turned something around really
quickly and and and did a phenomenal job
and 90 to 100,000 lines of code is no
joke at all. I guess as we wrap up and
and kind of end this interview, what is
like a lesson learned or or is there
anything extra good or anything that
kind of worries you about the launch? Uh
again, we're only 3 weeks into it, so
we're still seeing how uh the fair claim
works for people who were affected by
the shuttering down of Thorfi. But yeah,
are there any kind of like anything that
we haven't talked about yet or or any
lessons learned from the launch of TCY?
Learned a lot. Excellent experience. Uh
it it's been fun. Uh have a few lessons
to take back to Maya. Maya is still my
my darling. So we'll keep working on
that. Uh we just integrated Zcash which
is very exciting to me on Maya protocol.
We Cardano is next. But learned a lot.
learned that there's a very uh tightly
tightlyk knit community around chain
that care and that makes me even more
bullish on Maya because if so many
people cared this much about the mission
is because it's worth doing. It was uh
many lessons learned in crisis
management as well and stakeholder
agreement and uh put a lot of things in
practice that I've uh learned over over
the years as well. But it's a great
experience. Still, my heart goes out to
to affected users. Uh some did, you
know, exit at 25 30 cents. It's still
better than they would have gotten in a
chapter 7 type bankruptcy, but still uh
it sucks. So, you know, people I wasn't
involved in creating Torfi. I didn't run
any any torching note back then. I even
openly criticized a few things about
savers and lending. Uh but still I I
don't think we apologize enough. It
still sucks. So uh sorry to you and
sorry to the listeners, but uh we're
doing the best we can to to have it to
give back as much as possible uh beyond
$1, uh because that's what you deserve.
And uh but if someone needs the money
right away, you have an option. And
there's the option is is actually a good
one. uh if you compare with Celsius FTX
these are years and years and years
lots and lots and lots of of uh legal
fees a lot of uncertainty
uh and you end up getting even less. So
I think this is good an outcome as any
uh it was made with care and I hope it
uh survives the ages. Look at at at the
end of the day if you want to survive in
this place long term you have to take
personal accountability. So I never
blamed anyone other than myself for for
not doing as much research as I should
have into borrow and lend and um it it
was really amazing to see in a public
and open process the deliberation
process for a solution. So again just
like shout out to you and everyone who
participated in that from anyone who
commented to anyone who submitted a
proposal. It was it was dark times, but
for for what it's worth, and again, not
financial advice, but I'm still holding
my TCY and and I'm locking it up and not
looking back. So, I think on behalf of
people who are affected, like thank you
for the apology, but there's a free
market open code uh solution out there
that anybody can read and participate
in. And at the end of the day, like
we're adults. We're playing in a in a
cutting edge industry where nothing is
guaranteed and we should be assuming
that everything we put into
cryptocurrency and blockchain could go
to zero. So, welcome to the party. You
know, buy the ticket, take the ride. So,
with all that said, um, thank you so
much, Alux, for joining the pod today.
Like I said, it was an honor to be able
to chat with the person who drafted Prop
6. Um, and congrats on on the launch of
TCY and the successful launch at least
in the past three weeks that I've seen.
If anybody wants to learn more about you
or Maya Protocol, where can I send them?
Als
in in uh Twitter and and X or you can go
to my protocol.com and you'll see all of
the socials there and follow what we're
doing. And shout out to the Maya
Protocol intern on X uh keeping the
crypto Twitter feed feed fresh and fun
to follow. Yeah, they've had a blast.
Uh, it's it's so funny that they've been
doing a good job. Cool. Well, thank you
for the time today, Alux. Um, thank you,
Dylan. Have have a good time doing BD
and and enjoy the the Bitcoin
conference. Thank you, sir. Have a nice
one. Cheers. Bye-bye. Thank you so much
for tuning in to the Smart Economy
Podcast. To stay in the loop with all
our latest episodes and insights, head
over to www.smarteconomyodcast.com.
And don't forget to subscribe to our
YouTube channel for all of our video
content. If you enjoyed today's
discussion, please consider showing your
support by liking, commenting, and
reviewing this episode on your favorite
podcasting platform. Your feedback helps
us reach more listeners and bring even
better content your way. We'd also love
to hear from you, so please drop a
comment on Spotify or YouTube to share
what topics you'd like us to cover or
who you'd like to see as our next guest.
And if you or someone you know would
make a great guest, please reach out.
We're always looking for fresh voices
and new perspectives. For our NEO token
holders out there, please consider
voting for NEO news today as your
council representative. We've proudly
been serving the NEO ecosystem since
2017, and we'll continue to do so by
putting portions of our council rewards
directly back into ecosystem growth
initiatives. So once again, thank you so
much for listening to the Smart Economy
podcast and we look forward to catching
up with you next time.
[Applause]